---
title: "The whole is greater than the sum of its parts: Long-read sequencing for solving clinical problems in haematology"
date: 2024-01-23
tags: ["paper"]
---

`Bravo‐Perez, C., Cifuentes‐Riquelme, R., Padilla, J., de la Morena‐Barrio, M. E., Ortuño, F. J., Garrido‐Rodríguez, P., Amigo, ML., Heras, I., Vicente, V., Lozano, ML., Teruel-Montoya, R., de la Morena-Barrio, B. & Corral, J. (2024). The whole is greater than the sum of its parts: Long‐read sequencing for solving clinical problems in haematology. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, 28(3), e17961.`

DOi: [10.1111/jcmm.17961](https://doi.org/10.1111/jcmm.17961)

Structural variations (SVs) are common in haematological neoplasms. Although most SVs have canonical breakpoints, virtually all have atypical rearrangements that can be of difficult diagnosis. High-throughput sequencing (HTS) has improved the study of atypical SVs, complementing cytogenetics. However, the short reads (<150 bp) generated by HTS might lead to inaccurate mapping. This may not suppose a mere technical pitfall, but a problem to be faced, to guarantee the monitoring and guided-treatment of patients bearing atypical SVs when standard procedures are ‘blind’ to them.

Inversion of chromosome 16, inv(16)(p13q22)/t(16;16)(p13;q22), found in 5%–7% of de novo acute myeloid leukaemia (AML), joins *CBFB* (16q22) and *MYH11* (16p13) genes to form a chimeric oncoprotein that sequesters RUNX1. Up to 95% of cases with AML-inv(16) carry three recurrent breakpoints involving *CBFB* exon5, and *MYH11* exon33, exon29 or exon28, resulting in type A, D or E transcripts, respectively.3 To the best of our knowledge, at least 10 additional *CBFB::MYH11* transcripts with non-canonical breakpoints have been reported (Table 1). However, direct characterization of inv(16) at the genomic level has rarely been performed. In this context, third-generation HTS based on long reads, such as nanopore sequencing, could be excellent tools for the identification and comprehensive analysis of atypical SVs.
