---
title: "Identification of Thrombosis-Related Genes in Patients with Advanced Gastric Cancer: Data from AGAMENON-SEOM Registry"
date: 2022-01-11
tags: ["paper"]
---

`Zaragoza-Huesca, D., Garrido-Rodríguez, P., Jiménez-Fonseca, P., Martínez de Castro, E., Sánchez-Cánovas, M., Visa, L., Custodio, A., Fernández-Montes, A., Peñas-Martínez, J., Morales del Burgo, P., Gallego, J., Luengo-Gil, G., Vicente, V., Martínez-Martínez, I., & Carmona-Bayonas, A. (2022). Identification of Thrombosis-Related Genes in Patients with Advanced Gastric Cancer: Data from AGAMENON-SEOM Registry. Biomedicines, 10(1), 148.`

DOI: [10.3390/biomedicines10010148](https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines10010148)

Advanced gastric cancer is one of the most thrombogenic neoplasms. However, genetic mechanisms underlying this complication remain obscure, and the molecular and histological heterogeneity of this neoplasm hinder the identification of thrombotic biomarkers. Therefore, our main objective was to identify genes related to thrombosis regardless of Lauren subtypes. Furthermore, in a secondary exploratory study, we seek to discover thrombosis-associated genes that were specific to each TCGA molecular subtype. We designed a nested case-control study using the cohort of the AGAMENON national advanced gastric cancer registry. Ninety-seven patients were selected—48 with and 49 without venous thromboembolism (using propensity score matching to adjust for confounding factors)—and a differential gene expression array stratified by Lauren histopathological subtypes was carried out in primary tumor samples. For the secondary objective, the aforementioned differential expression analysis was conducted for each TCGA group. Fifteen genes were determined to be associated with thrombosis with the same expression trend in both the intestinal and diffuse subtypes. In thrombotic subjects, *CRELD1*, *KCNH8*, *CRYGN*, *MAGEB16*, *SAA1*, *ARL11*, *CCDC169*, *TRMT61A*, *RIPPLY3* and *PLA2G6* were underexpressed (adjusted-p < 0.05), while *PRKD3*, *MIR5683*, *SDCBP*, *EPS8* and *CDC45* were overexpressed (adjusted-p < 0.05), and correlated, by logistic regression, with lower or higher thrombotic risk, respectively, in the overall cohort. In each TCGA molecular subtype, we identified a series of genes differentially expressed in thrombosis that appear to be subtype-specific. We have identified several genes associated with venous thromboembolism in advanced gastric cancer that are common to Lauren intestinal and diffuse subtypes. Should these genetic factors be validated in the future, they could be complemented with existing clinical models to bolster the ability to predict thrombotic risk in individuals with advanced gastric adenocarcinoma.
